.. A quick VAT primer

A quick VAT Primer
==================

This is a very quick overview of the terminology and workings of VAT in the
EU.  It isn’t intended to be exhaustive, but it should cover the basics and
help you to understand the more detailed material supplied by EU member
states’ VAT administrations.

*This guide was written on the 1st of January 2015 and should be accurate for
that date.  Nevertheless, the author accepts no responsibility for any errors
container herein; if in doubt, check with a qualified accountant or your own
tax authority.*

What is VAT?
------------

Value Added Tax, or VAT, looks from the perspective of a consumer to be the
same as a Sales Tax — that is, a tax based on the price of the item they have
purchased.

The main difference between the two is that a true Sales Tax is only applied
at the point of sale to a consumer.  VAT, on the other hand, is applied for
every intermediate transaction involved.  For instance, imagine company A
makes a widget, which it sells to a wholesaler, B, who then sells it on to a
retailer, C, from where it is finally sold to a consumer, D.  Let’s also say
tha the rate of Sales Tax or VAT we’re considering is 10%.  Here’s what
happens in both cases:

Sales Tax
`````````

1. Company A sells widget for £10 to Wholesaler B.
2. Wholesaler B sells widget for £15 to Retailer C.
3. Retailer C sells widget to Consumer D for £20, plus £2 sales tax.
4. Retailer C now pays the £2 to the government (typically — sometimes Consumer
   D might need to pay it instead).

VAT
```

1. Company A sells widget for £10 plus £1 VAT to Wholesaler B.
   On its tax return, Company A lists the £1 as “output” tax, and Wholesaler
   B lists the £1 as “input” tax.

2. Wholesaler B sells widget for £15 plus £1.50 VAT to Retailer C.
   On its tax return, Wholesaler B lists the £1.50 as “output” tax, and
   Retailer C lists the £1.50 as “input” tax.

3. Retailer C sells widget to Consumer D for £20, plus £2 VAT.
   On its tax return, Retailer C lists the £2 as “output” tax.

4. Each of the companies now pays the difference between their output and input
   tax to the government, so Company A pays £1, Wholesaler B pays £0.50, and
   Retailer C pays a further £0.50.

   The total received by the government is still £2, but it has been collected
   piecemeal from all of the suppliers in the chain.

Implications of VAT
-------------------

The first implication of the above is that all businesses are going to have to
file tax returns for VAT purposes, because they need to account for the
“input” tax (tax that has already been paid) and “output” tax (tax they have
collected on a sale).

The second implication is that government is going to have to regulate
invoices and credit notes, because those are going to be the primary source of
information on how much VAT is payable, and they must be usable as proof of
tax paid by businesses claiming input tax as well as showing clearly the
amount of output tax that has been collected at each step.

Additionally, supply chains are rarely as simple as the above; typically,
Company A would have multiple inputs to its widget, and would want to claim
the input tax on each of those.

One further complication is that, as with Sales Tax, it is desirable that some
things be exempt from VAT.  In a pure Sales Tax, that’s easy — you just don’t
charge VAT to the consumer when they purchase an item.  With VAT, you wouldn’t
want the government to end up out of pocket because of input tax claims
against something that was exempt, so typically businesses are prohibited from
claiming input tax for any item that was used to produce an exempt item for
sale.  If an item they purchase is partly used for the production of
VAT-exempt items, and partly for items subject to VAT, they may have to work
out what proportion applies and can only reclaim that proportion of the input
tax.

If that sounds complicated, that’s because it is.

So why would anyone choose a VAT over a Sales Tax?  The idea is that it is
harder to avoid paying VAT.  In a Sales Tax system, Consumer D could pretend
to be a business and purchase from Retailer C without paying the Sales Tax.
But in the VAT system, *VAT is always charged*, so Consumer D can’t avoid
paying it.

Self-billing and the Reverse Charge
-----------------------------------

In the EU VAT system, there are actually two instances where VAT is not
charged.  The first is if you operate a “self-billing” arrangement with a
customer or supplier; let’s imagine that Company A and Wholesaler B have an
agreement to operate self-billing.  Company A now does not need to worry about
VAT; it sells its widget directly to Wholesaler B for £10, marking the invoice
clearly to indicate that the self-billing arrangement applies.

Wholesaler B then accounts for VAT as if it has sold the item to itself.  So,
it lists £1 as “output” tax and also £1 as “input” tax.  When it sells the
widget to Retailer C, with whom it does not operate self-billing, it lists the
£1.50 of “output” tax as before, so Wholesaler B will now pay £1.50 to the
government.  Notice that the final amount paid to the government is still the
same £2.

The second place is actually a variant of self-billing, and applies where a
business purchases a *service* (more on this in a moment) from an overseas
supplier.  In that specific case, the EU “reverse charge”
mechanism applies; the supplier need not worry about VAT, though if they are
also in the EU they may need to indicate on the invoice that the reverse
charge applies.  The purchaser then accounts
for VAT as if it had sold the service to itself.  The upshot of this rule is
that services supplied to business customers are taxed at the rate in the
customer’s country, not in the supplier’s country as might otherwise be the
case.

Goods and Services
------------------

We’ve skirted around this a bit so far, but EU VAT law distinguishes between
*goods* (broadly speaking, physical items) and *services* (pretty much
everything else, *including digital “goods” like software, music and films*).

The rules for goods, services and e-services are very different and so the
first thing to consider when you are going to sell something in the EU is
whether what you are selling is a good, a service, or an e-service.

(An *e-service*, in case you are wondering, is a service that is provided
electronically with minimal human intervention.  Downloadable software is one
such example.  The rules on what is or is not an e-service can be quite tricky
so if you need clarification you may need to consult your tax authority.)

When must I charge VAT and at what rate?
----------------------------------------

Case 1: You are in the same EU member state as your customer
````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````

In this case, the rules that apply are those of that member state.

Case 2: You are in a different EU member state to that of your customer
```````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````

* If you are selling a *good*, then provided your sales have not exceeded the
  distance selling threshold for your customer’s member state, you can charge
  VAT according to *your* country's rules.  Otherwise, you must register in
  the customer’s member state and apply that member state’s rules to the sale.

* If you are selling a *service* or an *e-service* and the customer is a
  business, you charge no VAT but indicate to the customer that they should
  apply the reverse charge mechanism.

* If you are selling a *service* to a consumer, you charge VAT according to
  *your* country’s rules.

* If you are selling an *e-service* to a consumer, you can either register in
  the customer’s member state and apply the relevant rules, *or* you can
  register for the Mini One Stop Shop in your member state.  In both cases you
  will charge VAT at the rate applicable in the customer’s member state.

Case 3: You are outside the EU and your customer is in an EU member state
`````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````

* If you are selling a *good*, VAT is your customer’s responsibility and
  should be dealt with, along with import duty, by the shipping company.

* If you are selling a *service*, VAT is your customer’s responsibility and
  they are supposed to operate the reverse charge.

* If you are selling an *e-service* to a business, VAT is your customer’s
  responsibility and they are supposed to operate the reverse charge.

* If you are selling an *e-service* to a consumer, you need to register for
  the Mini One Stop Shop in *any* EU member state (you can pick whichever you
  please), and charge VAT at the rate applicable in the customer’s member
  state.

Case 4: The customer is outside the EU
``````````````````````````````````````

In this case, the sale is outside of the scope of EU VAT.  Note that this is
different from being exempt, in that you *are* allowed to reclaim any input
tax associated with the sale.
